
Acclaim for 
THE LEAN STARTUP
Acclaim for 
THE LEAN STARTUP
“
The Lean Startup
 isn’t just about how to create a more successful
entrepreneurial business; it’s about what we can learn from those
businesses to improve virtually everything we do. I imagine Lean
Startup principles applied to government programs, to health care,
and to solving the world’s great problems. It’s ultimately an answer
to the question How can we learn more quickly what works and
discard what doesn’t?”
—Tim O’Reilly, CEO, O’Reilly Media
“Eric Ries unravels the mysteries of entrepreneurship and reveals
that magic and genius are not the necessary ingredients for success
but instead proposes a scienti0c process that can be learned and
replicated. Whether you are a startup entrepreneur or corporate
entrepreneur, there are important lessons here for you on your
quest toward the new and unknown.”
—Tim Brown, CEO, IDEO
“The road map for innovation for the twenty-first century. The ideas
in 
The Lean Startup
 will help create the next industrial revolution.”
—Steve Blank, lecturer, Stanford University,
UC Berkeley Hass Business School
“Every founding team should stop for forty-eight hours and read
The Lean Startup
. Seriously, stop and read this book now.”
—Scott Case, CEO, Startup America Partnership
“The key lesson of this book is that startups happen in the present
—that messy place between the past and the future where nothing
happens according to PowerPoint. Ries’s ‘read and react’ approach
to this sport, his relentless focus on validated learning, the never-
ending anxiety of hovering between ‘persevere’ and ‘pivot,’ all bear
witness to his appreciation for the dynamics of entrepreneurship.”
witness to his appreciation for the dynamics of entrepreneurship.”
—Geoffrey Moore, author
, 
Crossing the Chasm
“If you are an entrepreneur, read this book. If you are thinking
about becoming an entrepreneur, read this book. If you are just
curious about entrepreneurship, read this book. Starting Lean is
today’s best practice for innovators. Do yourself a favor and read
this book.”
—Randy Komisar, founding director of TiVo and author of the
bestselling
 
The Monk and the Riddle
“How do you apply the 0fty-year-old ideas of Lean to the fast-
paced, high-uncertainty world of startups? This book provides a
brilliant, well-documented, and practical answer. It is sure to
become a management classic.”
—Don Reinertsen, author
, 
The Principles of Product Development
Flow
“What would happen if businesses were built from the ground up
to learn what their customers really wanted? 
The Lean Startup
 is
the foundation for reimagining almost everything about how work
works. Don’t let the word startup in the title confuse you. This is a
cookbook for entrepreneurs in organizations of all sizes.”
—Roy Bahat, president, IGN Entertainment
“
The Lean Startup
 is a foundational must-read for founders,
enabling them to reduce product failures by bringing structure and
science to what is usually informal and an art. It provides
actionable ways to avoid product-learning mistakes, rigorously
evaluate early signals from the market through validated learning,
and decide whether to persevere or to pivot, all challenges that
heighten the chance of entrepreneurial failure.”
—Noam Wasserman, professor, Harvard Business School
“One of the best and most insightful new books on
entrepreneurship and management I’ve ever read. Should be
entrepreneurship and management I’ve ever read. Should be
required reading not only for the entrepreneurs that I work with,
but for my friends and colleagues in various industries who have
inevitably grappled with many of the challenges that 
The Lean
Startup
 addresses.”
—Eugene J. Huang, partner, True North Venture Partner
“In business, a ‘lean’ enterprise is sustainable e=ciency in action.
Eric Ries’s revolutionary Lean Startup method will help bring your
new business idea to an end result that is successful 
and
 sustainable.
You’ll 0nd innovative steps and strategies for creating and
managing your own startup while learning from the real-life
successes and collapses of others. This book is a must-read for
entrepreneurs who are truly ready to start something great!”
—Ken Blanchard, coauthor of 
The One Minute Manager
®
and
 
The One Minute Entrepreneur

Copyright © 2011 by Eric Ries
All rights reserved.
Published in the United States by Crown Business, an imprint of the Crown Publishing
Group, a division of Random House, Inc., New York. 
www.crownpublishing.com
CROWN BUSINESS is a trademark and CROWN and the Rising Sun colophon are
registered trademarks of Random House, Inc.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Ries, Eric, 1978–
   The lean startup / Eric Ries. — 1st ed.
      p. cm.
   1. New business enterprises. 2. Consumers’ preferences. 3. Organizational
effectiveness. I. Title.
   HD62.5.R545 2011
   658.1′1—dc22      2011012100
eISBN: 978-0-307-88791-7
Book design by Lauren Dong
Illustrations by Fred Haynes
Jacket design by Marcus Gosling
v3.1
For Tara
Contents
Cover
Title Page
Copyright
Dedication
Introduction
Part One VISION
  1. Start
  2. Define
  3. Learn
  4. Experiment
Part Two STEER
  5. Leap
  6. Test
  7. Measure
  8. Pivot (or Persevere)
Part Three ACCELERATE
  9. Batch
10. Grow
11. Adapt
12. Innovate
13. Epilogue: Waste Not
14. Join the Movement
Endnotes
Disclosures
Disclosures
Acknowledgments
About the Author
S
Introduction
top me if you’ve heard
 this one before. Brilliant college kids
sitting in a dorm are inventing the future. Heedless of boundaries,
possessed of new technology and youthful enthusiasm, they build
a new company from scratch. Their early success allows them to
raise money and bring an amazing new product to market. They
hire their friends, assemble a superstar team, and dare the world to
stop them.
Ten years and several startups ago, that was me, building my !rst
company. I particularly remember a moment from back then: the
moment I realized my company was going to fail. My cofounder
and I were at our wits’ end. The dot-com bubble had burst, and we
had spent all our money. We tried desperately to raise more
capital, and we could not. It was like a breakup scene from a
Hollywood movie: it was raining, and we were arguing in the
street. We couldn’t even agree on where to walk next, and so we
parted in anger, heading in opposite directions. As a metaphor for
our company’s failure, this image of the two of us, lost in the rain
and drifting apart, is perfect.
It remains a painful memory. The company limped along for
months afterward, but our situation was hopeless. At the time, it
had seemed we were doing everything right: we had a great
product, a brilliant team, amazing technology, and the right idea at
the right time. And we really were on to something. We 
were
building a way for college kids to create online pro!les for the
purpose of sharing … with employers. Oops. But despite a
promising idea, we were nonetheless doomed from day one,
because we did not know the process we would need to use to turn
because we did not know the process we would need to use to turn
our product insights into a great company.
If you’ve never experienced a failure like this, it is hard to
describe the feeling. It’s as if the world were falling out from under
you. You realize you’ve been duped. The stories in the magazines
are lies: hard work and perseverance don’t lead to success. Even
worse, the many, many, many promises you’ve made to employees,
friends, and family are not going to come true. Everyone who
thought you were foolish for stepping out on your own will be
proven right.
It wasn’t supposed to turn out that way. In magazines and
newspapers, in blockbuster movies, and on countless blogs, we hear
the mantra of the successful entrepreneurs: through determination,
brilliance, great timing, and—above all—a great product, you too
can achieve fame and fortune.
There is a mythmaking industry hard at work to sell us that story,
but I have come to believe that the story is false, the product of
selection bias and after-the-fact rationalization. In fact, having
worked with hundreds of entrepreneurs, I have seen !rsthand how
often a promising start leads to failure. The grim reality is that most
startups fail. Most new products are not successful. Most new
ventures do not live up to their potential.
Yet the story of perseverance, creative genius, and hard work
persists. Why is it so popular? I think there is something deeply
appealing about this modern-day rags-to-riches story. It makes
success seem inevitable if you just have the right stu/. It means that
the mundane details, the boring stu/, the small individual choices
don’t matter. If we build it, they will come. When we fail, as so
many of us do, we have a ready-made excuse: we didn’t 
have the
right stu/. We weren’t visionary enough or weren’t in the right
place at the right time.
After more than ten years as an entrepreneur, I came to reject
that line of thinking. I have learned from both my own successes
and failures and those of many others that it’s the boring stu/ that
matters the most. Startup success is not a consequence of good
genes or being in the right place at the right time. Startup success
can be engineered by following the right process, which means it
can be engineered by following the right process, which means it
can be learned, which means it can be taught.
Entrepreneurship is a kind of management. No, you didn’t read
that wrong. We have wildly divergent associations with these two
words, 
entrepreneurship
 and 
management
. Lately, it seems that one
is cool, innovative, and exciting and the other is dull, serious, and
bland. It is time to look past these preconceptions.
Let me tell you a second startup story. It’s 2004, and a group of
founders have just started a new company. Their previous company
had failed very publicly. Their credibility is at an all-time low. They
have a huge vision: to change the way people communicate by
using a new technology called avatars (remember, this was before
James Cameron’s blockbuster movie). They are following a
visionary named Will Harvey, who paints a compelling picture:
people connecting with their friends, hanging out online, using
avatars to give them a combination of intimate connection and safe
anonymity. Even better, instead of having to build all the clothing,
furniture, and accessories these avatars would need to accessorize
their digital lives, the customers would be enlisted to build those
things and sell them to one another.
The engineering challenge before them is immense: creating
virtual worlds, user-generated content, an online commerce engine,
micropayments, and—last but not least—the three-dimensional
avatar technology that can run on anyone’s PC.
I’m in this second story, too. I’m a cofounder and chief technology
o; cer of this company, which is called IMVU. At this point in our
careers, my cofounders and I are determined to make new mistakes.
We do everything wrong: instead of spending years perfecting our
technology, we build a minimum viable product, an early product
that is terrible, full of bugs and crash-your-computer-yes-really
stability problems. Then we ship it to customers way before it’s
ready. And we charge money for it. After securing initial customers,
we change the product constantly—much too fast by traditional
standards—shipping new versions of our product dozens of times
every single day.
We really did have customers in those early days—true visionary
early adopters—and we often talked to them and asked for their
early adopters—and we often talked to them and asked for their
feedback. But we emphatically did 
not
 do what they said. We
viewed their input as only one source of information about our
product and overall vision. In fact, we were much more likely to
run experiments on our customers than we were to cater to their
whims.
Traditional business thinking says that this approach shouldn’t
work, but it does, and you don’t have to take my word for it. As
you’ll see throughout this book, the approach we pioneered at
IMVU has become the basis for a new movement of entrepreneurs
around the world. It builds on many previous management and
product development ideas, including lean manufacturing, design
thinking, customer development, and agile development. It
represents a new approach to creating continuous innovation. It’s
called the Lean Startup.
Despite the volumes written on business strategy, the key
attributes of business leaders, and ways to identify the next big
thing, innovators still struggle to bring their ideas to life. This was
the frustration that led us to try a radical new approach at IMVU,
one characterized by an extremely fast cycle time, a 
focus on what
customers want (without asking them), and a scienti!c approach to
making decisions.
ORIGINS OF THE LEAN STARTUP
I am one of those people who grew up programming computers,
and so my journey to thinking about entrepreneurship and
management has taken a circuitous path. I have always worked on
the product development side of my industry; my partners and
bosses were managers or marketers, and my peers worked in
engineering and operations. Throughout my career, I kept having
the experience of working incredibly hard on products that
ultimately failed in the marketplace.
At !rst, largely because of my background, I viewed these as
technical problems that required technical solutions: better
architecture, a better engineering process, better discipline, focus, or
architecture, a better engineering process, better discipline, focus, or
product vision. These supposed !xes led to still more failure. So I
read everything I could get my hands on and was blessed to have
had some of the top minds in Silicon Valley as my mentors. By the
time I became a cofounder of IMVU, I was hungry for new ideas
about how to build a company.
I was fortunate to have cofounders who were willing to
experiment with new approaches. They were fed up—as I was—by
the failure of traditional thinking. Also, we were lucky to have
Steve Blank as an investor and adviser. Back in 2004, Steve had just
begun preaching a new idea: the business and marketing functions
of a startup should be considered as important as engineering and
product development and therefore deserve an equally rigorous
methodology to guide them. He called that methodology Customer
Development, and it o/ered insight and guidance to my daily work
as an entrepreneur.
Meanwhile, I was building IMVU’s product development team,
using some of the unorthodox methods I mentioned earlier.
Measured against the traditional theories of product development I
had been trained on in my career, these methods did not make
sense, yet I could see !rsthand that they were working. I struggled
to explain the practices to new employees, investors, and the
founders of other companies. We lacked a common language for
describing them and concrete principles for understanding them.
I began to search outside entrepreneurship for ideas that could
help me make sense of my experience. I began to study other
industries, especially manufacturing, from which most modern
theories of management derive. I studied lean manufacturing, a
process that originated in Japan with the Toyota Production
System, a completely new way of thinking about the manufacturing
of physical goods. I found that by applying ideas from lean
manufacturing to my own entrepreneurial challenges—with a few
tweaks and changes—I had the beginnings of a framework for
making sense of them.
This line of thought evolved into the Lean Startup: the
application of lean thinking to the process of innovation.
IMVU became a tremendous success. IMVU customers have
IMVU became a tremendous success. IMVU customers have
created more than 60 million avatars. It is a pro!table company
with annual revenues of more than $50 million in 2011, employing
more than a hundred people in our current o; ces in Mountain
View, California. IMVU’s virtual goods catalog—which seemed so
risky years ago—now has more than 6 million items in it; more
than 7,000 are added every day, almost all created by customers.
As a result of IMVU’s success, I began to be asked for advice by
other startups and venture capitalists. When I would describe my
experiences at IMVU, I was often met with blank stares or extreme
skepticism. The most common reply was “That could 
never work!”
My experience so Kew in the face of conventional thinking that
most people, even in the innovation hub of Silicon Valley, could
not wrap their minds around it.
Then I started to write, !rst on a blog called 
Startup Lessons
Learned
, and speak—at conferences and to companies, startups, and
venture capitalists—to anyone who would listen. In the process of
being called on to defend and explain my insights and with the
collaboration of other writers, thinkers, and entrepreneurs, I had a
chance to re!ne and develop the theory of the Lean Startup beyond
its rudimentary beginnings. My hope all along was to !nd ways to
eliminate the tremendous waste I saw all around me: startups that
built products nobody wanted, new products pulled from the
shelves, countless dreams unrealized.
Eventually, the Lean Startup idea blossomed into a global
movement. Entrepreneurs began forming local in-person groups to
discuss and apply Lean Startup ideas. There are now organized
communities of practice in more than a hundred cities around the
world.
1
 My travels have taken me across countries and continents.
Everywhere I have seen the signs of a new entrepreneurial
renaissance. The Lean Startup movement is making
entrepreneurship accessible to a whole new generation of founders
who are hungry for new ideas about how to build successful
companies.
Although my background is in high-tech software
entrepreneurship, the movement has grown way beyond those
entrepreneurship, the movement has grown way beyond those
roots. Thousands of entrepreneurs are putting Lean Startup
principles to work in every conceivable industry. I’ve had the
chance to work with entrepreneurs in companies of all sizes, in
di/erent industries, and even in government. This journey has taken
me to places I never imagined I’d see, from the world’s most elite
venture capitalists, to Fortune 500 boardrooms, to the Pentagon.
The most nervous I have ever been in a meeting was when 
I was
attempting to explain Lean Startup principles to the chief
information o; cer of the U.S. Army, who is a three-star general
(for the record, he was extremely open to new ideas, even from a
civilian like me).
Pretty soon I realized that it was time to focus on the Lean
Startup movement full time. My mission: to improve the success
rate of new innovative products worldwide. The result is the book
you are reading.
THE LEAN STARTUP METHOD
This is a book for entrepreneurs and the people who hold them
accountable. The !ve principles of the Lean Startup, which inform
all three parts of this book, are as follows:
1. Entrepreneurs are everywhere
. You don’t have to work in a
garage to be in a startup. The concept of entrepreneurship includes
anyone who works within my de!nition of a startup: a human
institution designed to create new products and services under
conditions of extreme uncertainty. That means entrepreneurs are
everywhere and the Lean Startup approach can work in any size
company, even a very large enterprise, in any sector or industry.
2. Entrepreneurship is management
. A startup is an institution,
not just a product, and so it requires a new kind of management
speci!cally geared to its context of extreme uncertainty. In fact, as I
will argue later, I believe “entrepreneur” should be considered a
will argue later, I believe “entrepreneur” should be considered a
job title in all modern companies that depend on innovation for
their future growth.
3. Validated learning
. Startups exist not just to make stu/, make
money, or even serve customers. They exist to 
learn
 how 
to build a
sustainable business. This learning can be validated scienti!cally by
running frequent experiments that allow entrepreneurs to test each
element of their vision.
4. Build-Measure-Learn
. The fundamental activity of a startup is
to turn ideas into products, measure how customers respond, and
then learn whether to pivot or persevere. All successful startup
processes should be geared to accelerate that feedback loop.
5. Innovation accounting
. To improve entrepreneurial outcomes
and hold innovators accountable, we need to focus on the boring
stu/: how to measure progress, how to set up milestones, and how
to prioritize work. This requires a new kind of accounting designed
for startups—and the people who hold them accountable.
Why Startups Fail
Why are startups failing so badly everywhere we look?
The !rst problem is the allure of a good plan, a solid strategy,
and thorough market research. In earlier eras, these things were
indicators of likely success. The overwhelming temptation is to
apply them to startups too, but this doesn’t work, because startups
operate with too much uncertainty. Startups do not yet know who
their customer is or what their product should be. As the world
becomes more uncertain, it gets harder and harder to predict the
future. The old management methods are not up to the task.
Planning and forecasting are only accurate when based on a long,
stable operating history and a relatively static environment. Startups
stable operating history and a relatively static environment. Startups
have neither.
The second problem is that after seeing traditional management
fail to solve this problem, some entrepreneurs and 
investors have
thrown up their hands and adopted the “Just Do It” school of
startups. This school believes that if management is the problem,
chaos is the answer. Unfortunately, as I can attest !rsthand, this
doesn’t work either.
It may seem counterintuitive to think that something as
disruptive, innovative, and chaotic as a startup can be managed or,
to be accurate, 
must
 be managed. Most people think of process and
management as boring and dull, whereas startups are dynamic and
exciting. But what is actually exciting is to see startups succeed and
change the world. The passion, energy, and vision that people bring
to these new ventures are resources too precious to waste. We can—
and must—do better. This book is about how.
and must—do better. This book is about how.
HOW THIS BOOK IS ORGANIZED
This book is divided into three parts: “Vision,” “Steer,” and
“Accelerate.”
“Vision” makes the case for a new discipline of entrepreneurial
management. I identify who is an entrepreneur, de!ne a startup,
and articulate a new way for startups to gauge if they are making
progress, called validated learning. To achieve that learning, we’ll
see that startups—in a garage or inside an enterprise—can use
scienti!c experimentation to discover how to build a sustainable
business.
“Steer” dives into the Lean Startup method in detail, showing one
major turn through the core Build-Measure-Learn feedback loop.
Beginning with leap-of-faith assumptions that cry out for rigorous
testing, you’ll learn how to build a minimum viable product to test
those assumptions, a new accounting system for evaluating whether
you’re making progress, and a method for 
deciding whether to
pivot (changing course with one foot anchored to the ground) or
persevere.
In “Accelerate,” we’ll explore techniques that enable Lean
Startups to speed through the Build-Measure-Learn feedback loop
as quickly as possible, even as they scale. We’ll explore lean
manufacturing concepts that are applicable to startups, too, such as
the power of small batches. We’ll also discuss organizational design,
how products grow, and how to apply Lean Startup principles
beyond the proverbial garage, even inside the world’s largest
companies.
MANAGEMENT’S SECOND CENTURY
As a society, we have a proven set of techniques for managing big
companies and we know the best practices for building physical
products. But when it comes to startups and innovation, we are still
shooting in the dark. We are relying on vision, chasing the “great
shooting in the dark. We are relying on vision, chasing the “great
men” who can make magic happen, or trying to analyze our new
products to death. These are new problems, born of the success of
management in the twentieth century.
This book attempts to put entrepreneurship and innovation on a
rigorous footing. We are at the dawn of management’s second
century. It is our challenge to do something great with the
opportunity we have been given. The Lean Startup movement seeks
to ensure that those of us who long to build the next big thing will
have the tools we need to change the world.
Part One
Part One
VISION
B
1
START
ENTREPRENEURIAL MANAGEMENT
uilding a startup is an
 exercise in institution building; thus, it
necessarily involves management. This often comes as a surprise
to aspiring entrepreneurs, because their associations with these
two words are so diametrically opposed. Entrepreneurs are rightly
wary of implementing traditional management practices early on in
a startup, afraid that they will invite bureaucracy or stifle creativity.
Entrepreneurs have been trying to )t the square peg of their
unique problems into the round hole of general management for
decades. As a result, many entrepreneurs take a “just do it” attitude,
avoiding all forms of management, process, and discipline.
Unfortunately, this approach leads to chaos more often than it does
to success. I should know: my )rst startup failures were all of this
kind.
The tremendous success of general management over the last
century has provided unprecedented material abundance, but those
management principles are ill suited to handle the chaos and
uncertainty that startups must face.
I believe that entrepreneurship requires a managerial discipline to
harness the entrepreneurial opportunity we have been given.
There are more entrepreneurs operating today than at any
previous time in history. This has been made possible by dramatic
previous time in history. This has been made possible by dramatic
changes in the global economy. To cite but one example, one often
hears commentators lament the loss of manufacturing jobs in the
United States over the previous two decades, but one rarely hears
about a corresponding loss of manufacturing capability. That’s
because total manufacturing output in the United States is
increasing
 (by 15 percent in the last decade) even as jobs continue
to be lost (see the charts below). In e4ect, the huge productivity
increases made possible by modern management and technology
have created more productive capacity than )rms know what to do
with.
1
We are living through an unprecedented worldwide
entrepreneurial renaissance, but this opportunity is laced with peril.
Because we lack a coherent management paradigm for new
innovative ventures, we’re throwing our excess capacity around
with wild abandon. Despite this lack of rigor, we are )nding some
ways to make money, but for every success there are far too many
failures: products pulled from shelves mere weeks after being
launched, high-pro)le startups lauded in the press and forgotten a
few months later, and new products that wind up being used by
nobody. What makes these failures particularly painful is not just
the economic damage done to individual employees, companies,
and investors; they are also a colossal waste of our civilization’s
most precious resource: the time, passion, and skill of its people.
The Lean Startup movement is dedicated to preventing these
failures.


THE ROOTS OF THE LEAN STARTUP
The Lean Startup takes its name from the lean manufacturing
revolution that Taiichi Ohno and Shigeo Shingo are credited with
developing at Toyota. Lean thinking is radically altering the way
supply chains and production systems are run. Among its tenets are
drawing on the knowledge and creativity of individual workers, the
shrinking of batch sizes, just-in-time production and inventory
control, and an acceleration of cycle times. It taught the world the
di4erence between value-creating activities and waste and showed
how to build quality into products from the inside out.
The Lean Startup adapts these ideas to the context of
entrepreneurship, proposing that entrepreneurs judge their progress
di4erently from the way other kinds of ventures do. Progress in
di4erently from the way other kinds of ventures do. Progress in
manufacturing is measured by the production of high-quality
physical goods. As we’ll see in 
Chapter 3
, the Lean Startup uses a
di4erent unit of progress, called validated learning. With 
scientific
learning as our yardstick, we can discover and eliminate the sources
of waste that are plaguing entrepreneurship.
A comprehensive theory of entrepreneurship should address all
the functions of an early-stage venture: vision and concept, product
development, marketing and sales, scaling up, partnerships and
distribution, and structure and organizational design. It has to
provide a method for measuring progress in the context of extreme
uncertainty. It can give entrepreneurs clear guidance on how to
make the many trade-o4 decisions they face: whether and when to
invest in process; formulating, planning, and creating infrastructure;
when to go it alone and when to partner; when to respond to
feedback and when to stick with vision; and how and when to
invest in scaling the business. Most of all, it must allow
entrepreneurs to make testable predictions.
For example, consider the recommendation that you build cross-
functional teams and hold them accountable to what we call
learning milestones
 instead of organizing your company into strict
functional departments (marketing, sales, information technology,
human resources, etc.) that hold people accountable for performing
well in their specialized areas (see 
Chapter 7
). Perhaps you agree
with this recommendation, or perhaps you are skeptical. Either
way, if you decide to implement it, I predict that you pretty quickly
will get feedback from your teams that the new process is reducing
their productivity. They will ask to go back to the old way of
working, in which they had the opportunity to “stay e?cient” by
working in larger batches and passing work between departments.
It’s safe to predict this result, and not just because I have seen it
many times in the companies I work with. It is a straightforward
prediction of the Lean Startup theory itself. When people are used
to evaluating their productivity locally, they feel that a good day is
one in which they did their job well all day. When I 
worked as a
programmer, that meant eight straight hours of programming
without interruption. That was a good day. In contrast, if I was
without interruption. That was a good day. In contrast, if I was
interrupted with questions, process, or—heaven forbid—meetings, I
felt bad. What did I really accomplish that day? Code and product
features were tangible to me; I could see them, understand them,
and show them off. Learning, by contrast, is frustratingly intangible.
The Lean Startup asks people to start measuring their
productivity di4erently. Because startups often accidentally build
something nobody wants, it doesn’t matter much if they do it on
time and on budget. The goal of a startup is to )gure out the right
thing to build—the thing customers want and will pay for—as
quickly as possible. In other words, the Lean Startup is a new way
of looking at the development of innovative new products that
emphasizes fast iteration and customer insight, a huge vision, and
great ambition, all at the same time.
Henry Ford is one of the most successful and celebrated
entrepreneurs of all time. Since the idea of management has been
bound up with the history of the automobile since its )rst days, I
believe it is )tting to use the automobile as a metaphor for a
startup.
An internal combustion automobile is powered by two important
and very di4erent feedback loops. The )rst feedback loop is deep
inside the engine. Before Henry Ford was a famous CEO, he was an
engineer. He spent his days and nights tinkering in his garage with
the precise mechanics of getting the engine cylinders to move. Each
tiny explosion within the cylinder provides the motive force to turn
the wheels but also drives the ignition of the next explosion. Unless
the timing of this feedback loop is managed precisely, the engine
will sputter and break down.
Startups have a similar engine that I call the 
engine of growth
.
The markets and customers for startups are diverse: a toy 
company,
a consulting )rm, and a manufacturing plant may not seem like
they have much in common, but, as we’ll see, they operate with the
same engine of growth.
Every new version of a product, every new feature, and every
Every new version of a product, every new feature, and every
new marketing program is an attempt to improve this engine of
growth. Like Henry Ford’s tinkering in his garage, not all of these
changes turn out to be improvements. New product development
happens in )ts and starts. Much of the time in a startup’s life is
spent tuning the engine by making improvements in product,
marketing, or operations.
The second important feedback loop in an automobile is
between the driver and the steering wheel. This feedback is so
immediate and automatic that we often don’t think about it, but it
is steering that di4erentiates driving from most other forms of
transportation. If you have a daily commute, you probably know
the route so well that your hands seem to steer you there on their
own accord. We can practically drive the route in our sleep. Yet if I
asked you to close your eyes and write down exactly how to get to
your o?ce—not the street directions but every action you need to
take, every push of hand on wheel and foot on pedals—you’d )nd
it impossible. The choreography of driving is incredibly complex
when one slows down to think about it.
By contrast, a rocket ship requires just this kind of in-advance
calibration. It must be launched with the most precise instructions
on what to do: every thrust, every )ring of a booster, and every
change in direction. The tiniest error at the point of launch could
yield catastrophic results thousands of miles later.
Unfortunately, too many startup business plans look more like
they are planning to launch a rocket ship than drive a car. They
prescribe the steps to take and the results to expect in excruciating
detail, and as in planning to launch a rocket, they are set up in such
a way that even tiny errors in assumptions can lead to catastrophic
outcomes.
One company I worked with had the misfortune of forecasting
signi)cant customer adoption—in the millions—for one of its new
products. Powered by a splashy launch, the company successfully
executed its plan. Unfortunately, customers did not Cock to the
product in great numbers. Even worse, the company had invested in
massive infrastructure, hiring, and support to handle the inCux of
customers it expected. When the customers failed to materialize, the
customers it expected. When the customers failed to materialize, the
company had committed itself so completely that they could not
adapt in time. They had “achieved failure”—successfully, faithfully,
and rigorously executing a plan that turned out to have been utterly
flawed.
The Lean Startup method, in contrast, is designed to teach you
how to drive a startup. Instead of making complex plans that are
based on a lot of assumptions, you can make constant adjustments
with a steering wheel called the 
Build-Measure-Learn
 feedback
loop. Through this process of steering, we can learn when and if it’s
time to make a sharp turn called a 
pivot
 or whether we should
persevere
 along our current path. Once we have an engine that’s
revved up, the Lean Startup o4ers methods to scale and grow the
business with maximum acceleration.
Throughout the process of driving, you always have a clear idea
of where you’re going. If you’re commuting to work, you don’t give
up because there’s a detour in the road or you made a wrong turn.
You remain thoroughly focused on getting to your destination.
Startups also have a true north, a destination in mind: creating a
thriving and world-changing business. I call that a startup’s 
vision
.
To achieve that vision, startups employ a 
strategy
, which includes a
business model, a product road map, a point of view about partners
and competitors, and ideas about who the customer will be. The
product
 is the end result of this strategy (see the chart on 
this page
).
Products change constantly through the process of optimization,
what I call 
tuning the engine
. Less frequently, the strategy may have
to change (called a pivot). However, the overarching vision rarely
changes. Entrepreneurs are committed to seeing the startup through
to that destination. Every setback is an opportunity for learning
how to get where they want to go (see the chart below).

In real life, a startup is a portfolio of activities. A lot is happening
simultaneously: the engine is running, acquiring new customers and
serving existing ones; we are tuning, trying to improve our product,
marketing, and operations; and we are steering, deciding if and
when to pivot. The challenge of entrepreneurship is to balance all
these activities. Even the smallest startup faces the challenge of
supporting existing customers while trying to innovate. Even the
most established company faces the imperative to invest in
innovation lest it become obsolete. As companies grow, what
changes is the mix of these activities in the company’s portfolio of
work.
Entrepreneurship is management. And yet, imagine a modern
manager who is tasked with building a new product in the context
of an established company. Imagine that she goes back to her
company’s chief )nancial o?cer (CFO) a year later and says, “We
have failed to meet the growth targets we predicted. In fact, we
have almost no new customers and no new revenue. However, we
have learned an incredible amount and are on the cusp of a
breakthrough new line of business. All we need is another year.”
Most of the time, this would be the last report this intrapreneur
would give her employer. The reason is that in general
management, a failure to deliver results is due to either a failure to
plan adequately or a failure to execute properly. Both are
signi)cant lapses, yet new product development in our modern
economy routinely requires exactly this kind of failure on the way
to greatness. In the Lean Startup movement, we have come to
realize that these internal innovators are actually entrepreneurs, too,
and that entrepreneurial management can help them succeed; this is
the subject of the next chapter.
A
2
DEFINE
WHO, EXACTLY, IS AN ENTREPRENEUR?
s I travel the world
 talking about the Lean Startup, I’m
consistently surprised that I meet people in the audience who
seem out of place. In addition to the more traditional startup
entrepreneurs I meet, these people are general managers, mostly
working in very large companies, who are tasked with creating new
ventures or product innovations. They are adept at organizational
politics: they know how to form autonomous divisions with
separate pro1t and loss statements (P&Ls) and can shield
controversial teams from corporate meddling. The biggest surprise
is that they are visionaries. Like the startup founders I have worked
with for years, they can see the future of their industries and are
prepared to take bold risks to seek out new and innovative
solutions to the problems their companies face.
Mark, for example, is a manager for an extremely large company
who came to one of my lectures. He is the leader of a division that
recently had been chartered to bring his company into the twenty-
1rst century by building a new suite of products designed to take
advantage of the Internet. When he came to talk to me afterward, I
started to give him the standard advice about how to create
innovation teams inside big companies, and 
he stopped me in
midstream: “Yeah, I’ve read 
The Innovator’s Dilemma
.
1
 I’ve got that
all taken care of.” He was a long-term employee of the company
and a successful manager to boot, so managing internal politics was
and a successful manager to boot, so managing internal politics was
the least of his problems. I should have known; his success was a
testament to his ability to navigate the company’s corporate
policies, personnel, and processes to get things done.
Next, I tried to give him some advice about the future, about cool
new highly leveraged product development technologies. He
interrupted me again: “Right. I know all about the Internet, and I
have a vision for how our company needs to adapt to it or die.”
Mark has all the entrepreneurial 
prerequisites
 nailed—proper
team structure, good personnel, a strong vision for the future, and
an appetite for risk taking—and so it 1nally occurred to me to ask
why he was coming to me for advice. He said, “It’s as if we have all
of the raw materials: kindling, wood, paper, >int, even some
sparks. But where’s the 1re?” The theories of management that
Mark had studied treat innovation like a “black box” by focusing on
the structures companies need to put in place to form internal
startup teams. But Mark found himself working 
inside the black
box
—and in need of guidance.
What Mark was missing was a process for converting the raw
materials of innovation into real-world breakthrough successes.
Once a team is set up, what should it do? What process should it
use? How should it be held accountable to performance
milestones? These are questions the Lean Startup methodology is
designed to answer.
My point? Mark is an entrepreneur just like a Silicon Valley high-
tech founder with a garage startup. He needs the principles of the
Lean Startup just as much as the folks I thought of as classic
entrepreneurs do.
Entrepreneurs who operate inside an established organization
sometimes are called “intrapreneurs” because of the special
circumstances that attend building a startup within a larger
company. As I have applied Lean Startup ideas in an ever-widening
variety of companies and industries, I have come to believe that
intrapreneurs have much more in common with the rest of the
community of entrepreneurs than most people believe. Thus, when
I use the term 
entrepreneur
, I am referring to the whole startup
ecosystem regardless of company size, sector, or stage of
ecosystem regardless of company size, sector, or stage of
development.
This book is for entrepreneurs of all stripes: from young
visionaries with little backing but great ideas to seasoned
visionaries within larger companies such as Mark—and the people
who hold them accountable.
IF I’M AN ENTREPRENEUR, WHAT’S A STARTUP?
The Lean Startup is a set of practices for helping entrepreneurs
increase their odds of building a successful startup. To set the record
straight, it’s important to define what a startup is:
A startup is a human institution designed to create a new
product or service under conditions of extreme uncertainty.
I’ve come to realize that the most important part of this
de1nition is what it omits. It says nothing about size of the
company, the industry, or the sector of the economy. Anyone who is
creating a new product or business under conditions of extreme
uncertainty is an entrepreneur whether he or she knows it or not
and whether working in a government agency, a venture-backed
company, a nonpro1t, or a decidedly for-pro1t company with
financial investors.
Let’s take a look at each of the pieces. The word 
institution
connotes bureaucracy, process, even lethargy. How can that be part
of a startup? Yet successful startups are full of activities associated
with building an institution: hiring creative employees, coordinating
their activities, and creating a company culture that delivers results.
We often lose sight of the fact that a startup is not just about a
product, a technological breakthrough, or even a brilliant idea. A
startup is greater than the sum of its parts; it is an acutely human
enterprise.
The fact that a startup’s product or service is a new innovation is
also an essential part of the de1nition and a tricky part too. I prefer
to use the broadest de1nition of 
product
, one that encompasses any
to use the broadest de1nition of 
product
, one that encompasses any
source of value for the people who become customers. Anything
those customers experience from their interaction with a company
should be considered part of that company’s product. This is true of
a grocery store, an e-commerce website, a consulting service, and a
nonpro1t social service agency. In every case, the organization is
dedicated to uncovering a new source of value for customers and
cares about the impact of its product on those customers.
It’s also important that the word 
innovation
 be understood
broadly. Startups use many kinds of innovation: novel scienti1c
discoveries, repurposing an existing technology for a new use,
devising a new business model that unlocks value that was hidden,
or simply bringing a product or service to a new location or a
previously underserved set of customers. In all these cases,
innovation is at the heart of the company’s success.
There is one more important part of this definition: the context in
which the innovation happens. Most businesses—large and small
alike—are excluded from this context. Startups are designed to
confront situations of extreme uncertainty. To open up a new
business that is an exact clone of an existing business all 
the way
down to the business model, pricing, target customer, and product
may be an attractive economic investment, but it is not a startup
because its success depends only on execution—so much so that this
success can be modeled with high accuracy. (This is why so many
small businesses can be 1nanced with simple bank loans; the level
of risk and uncertainty is understood well enough that a loan oBcer
can assess its prospects.)
Most tools from general management are not designed to >ourish
in the harsh soil of extreme uncertainty in which startups thrive.
The future is unpredictable, customers face a growing array of
alternatives, and the pace of change is ever increasing. Yet most
startups—in garages and enterprises alike—still are managed by
using standard forecasts, product milestones, and detailed business
plans.
THE SNAPTAX STORY
In 2009, a startup decided to try something really audacious. They
wanted to liberate taxpayers from expensive tax stores by
automating the process of collecting information typically found on
W-2 forms (the end-of-year statement that most employees receive
from their employer that summarizes their taxable wages for the
year). The startup quickly ran into diBculties. Even though many
consumers had access to a printer/scanner in their home or oBce,
few knew how to use those devices. After numerous conversations
with potential customers, the team lit upon the idea of having
customers take photographs of the forms directly from their cell
phone. In the process of testing this concept, customers asked
something unexpected: would it be possible to 1nish 
the whole tax
return
 right on the phone itself?
That was not an easy task. Traditional tax preparation requires
consumers to wade through hundreds of questions, many 
forms, and
a lot of paperwork. This startup tried something novel by deciding
to ship an early version of its product that could do much less than
a complete tax package. The initial version worked only for
consumers with a very simple return to 1le, and it worked only in
California.
Instead of having consumers 1ll out a complex form, they
allowed the customers to use the phone’s camera to take a picture
of their W-2 forms. From that single picture, the company
developed the technology to compile and 1le most of the 1040 EZ
tax return. Compared with the drudgery of traditional tax 1ling, the
new product—called SnapTax—provides a magical experience.
From its modest beginning, SnapTax grew into a signi1cant startup
success story. Its nationwide launch in 2011 showed that customers
loved it, to the tune of more than 350,000 downloads in the 1rst
three weeks.
This is the kind of amazing innovation you’d expect from a new
startup.
However, the name of this company may surprise you. SnapTax
was developed by Intuit, America’s largest producer of 1nance, tax,
and accounting tools for individuals and small businesses. With
and accounting tools for individuals and small businesses. With
more than 7,700 employees and annual revenues in the billions,
Intuit is not a typical startup.
2
The team that built SnapTax doesn’t look much like the
archetypal image of entrepreneurs either. They don’t work in a
garage or eat ramen noodles. Their company doesn’t lack for
resources. They are paid a full salary and benefits. They come into a
regular office every day. Yet they are entrepreneurs.
Stories like this one are not nearly as common inside large
corporations as they should be. After all, SnapTax competes directly
with one of Intuit’s >agship products: the fully featured TurboTax
desktop software. Usually, companies like Intuit fall into the trap
described in Clayton Christensten’s 
The Innovator’s Dilemma:
 they
are very good at creating incremental 
improvements to existing
products and serving existing customers, which Christensen called
sustaining innovation
, but struggle to create breakthrough new
products
—disruptive innovation—
that can create new sustainable
sources of growth.
One remarkable part of the SnapTax story is what the team
leaders said when I asked them to account for their unlikely success.
Did they hire superstar entrepreneurs from outside the company?
No, they assembled a team from within Intuit. Did they face
constant meddling from senior management, which is the bane of
innovation teams in many companies? No, their executive sponsors
created an “island of freedom” where they could experiment as
necessary. Did they have a huge team, a large budget, and lots of
marketing dollars? Nope, they started with a team of five.
What allowed the SnapTax team to innovate was not their genes,
destiny, or astrological signs but a process deliberately facilitated by
Intuit’s senior management. Innovation is a bottoms-up,
decentralized, and unpredictable thing, but that doesn’t mean it
cannot be managed. It can, but to do so requires a new
management discipline, one that needs to be mastered not just by
practicing entrepreneurs seeking to build the next big thing but also
by the people who support them, nurture them, and hold them
accountable. In other words, cultivating entrepreneurship is the
accountable. In other words, cultivating entrepreneurship is the
responsibility of senior management. Today, a cutting-edge
company such as Intuit can point to success stories like SnapTax
because it has recognized the need for a new management
paradigm. This is a realization that was years in the making.
3
A SEVEN-THOUSAND-PERSON LEAN STARTUP
In 1983, Intuit’s founder, the legendary entrepreneur Scott Cook,
had the radical notion (with cofounder Tom Proulx) 
that personal
accounting should happen by computer. Their success was far from
inevitable; they faced numerous competitors, an uncertain future,
and an initially tiny market. A decade later, the company went
public and subsequently fended oL well-publicized attacks from
larger incumbents, including the software behemoth Microsoft.
Partly with the help of famed venture capitalist John Doerr, Intuit
became a fully diversi1ed enterprise, a member of the Fortune
1000 that now provides dozens of market-leading products across
its major divisions.
This is the kind of entrepreneurial success we’re used to hearing
about: a ragtag team of underdogs who eventually achieve fame,
acclaim, and significant riches.
Flash-forward to 2002. Cook was frustrated. He had just tabulated
ten years of data on all of Intuit’s new product introductions and
had concluded that the company was getting a measly return on its
massive investments. Simply put, too many of its new products
were failing. By traditional standards, Intuit is an extremely well-
managed company, but as Scott dug into the root causes of those
failures, he came to a diBcult conclusion: the prevailing
management paradigm he and his company had been practicing
was inadequate to the problem of continuous innovation in the
modern economy.
By fall 2009, Cook had been working to change Intuit’s
management culture for several years. He came across my early
work on the Lean Startup and asked me to give a talk at Intuit. In
Silicon Valley this is not the kind of invitation you turn down. I
Silicon Valley this is not the kind of invitation you turn down. I
admit I was curious. I was still at the beginning of my Lean Startup
journey and didn’t have much appreciation for the challenges faced
by a Fortune 1000 company like his.
My conversations with Cook and Intuit chief executive oBcer
(CEO) Brad Smith were my initiation into the thinking of modern
general managers, who struggle with entrepreneurship 
every bit as
much as do venture capitalists and founders in a garage. To combat
these challenges, Scott and Brad are going back to Intuit’s roots.
They are working to build entrepreneurship and risk taking into all
their divisions.
For example, consider one of Intuit’s >agship products. Because
TurboTax does most of its sales around tax season in the United
States, it used to have an extremely conservative culture. Over the
course of the year, the marketing and product teams would
conceive one major initiative that would be rolled out just in time
for tax season. Now they test over 1ve hundred diLerent changes in
a two-and-a-half-month tax season. They’re running up to seventy
diLerent tests per week. The team can make a change live on its
website on Thursday, run it over the weekend, read the results on
Monday, and come to conclusions starting Tuesday; then they
rebuild new tests on Thursday and launch the next set on Thursday
night.
As Scott put it, “Boy, the amount of learning they get is just
immense now. And what it does is develop entrepreneurs, because
when you have only one test, you don’t have entrepreneurs, you
have politicians, because you have to sell. Out of a hundred good
ideas, you’ve got to sell your idea. So you build up a society of
politicians and salespeople. When you have 1ve hundred tests
you’re running, then everybody’s ideas can run. And then you create
entrepreneurs who run and learn and can retest and relearn as
opposed to a society of politicians. So we’re trying to drive that
throughout our organization, using examples which have nothing to
do with high tech, like the website example. Every business today
has a website. You don’t have to be high tech to use fast-cycle
testing.”
This kind of change is hard. After all, the company has a
This kind of change is hard. After all, the company has a
signi1cant number of existing customers who continue to demand
exceptional service and investors who expect steady, growing
returns.
Scott says,
It goes against the grain of what people have been taught in
business and what leaders have been taught. The problem
isn’t with the teams or the entrepreneurs. They love the
chance to quickly get their baby out into the market. They
love the chance to have the customer vote instead of the
suits voting. The real issue is with the leaders and the
middle managers. There are many business leaders who
have been successful because of analysis. They think they’re
analysts, and their job is to do great planning and analyzing
and have a plan.
The amount of time a company can count on holding on to
market leadership to exploit its earlier innovations is shrinking, and
this creates an imperative for even the most entrenched companies
to invest in innovation. In fact, I believe a company’s only
sustainable path to long-term economic growth is to build an
“innovation factory” that uses Lean Startup techniques to create
disruptive innovations on a continuous basis. In other words,
established companies need to 1gure out how to accomplish what
Scott Cook did in 1983, but on an industrial scale and with an
established cohort of managers steeped in traditional management
culture.
Ever the maverick, Cook asked me to put these ideas to the test,
and so I gave a talk that was simulcast to all seven thousand–plus
Intuit employees during which I explained the theory of the Lean
Startup, repeating my de1nition: an organization designed to create
new products and services under conditions of extreme uncertainty.
What happened next is etched in my memory. CEO Brad Smith
had been sitting next to me as I spoke. When I was done, he got up
and said before all of Intuit’s employees, “Folks, listen 
up. You
and said before all of Intuit’s employees, “Folks, listen 
up. You
heard Eric’s definition of a startup. It has three parts, and we here at
Intuit match 
all three parts
 of that definition.”
Scott and Brad are leaders who realize that something new is
needed in management thinking. Intuit is proof that this kind of
thinking can work in established companies. Brad explained to me
how they hold themselves accountable for their new innovation
eLorts by measuring two things: the number of customers using
products that didn’t exist three years ago and the percentage of
revenue coming from offerings that did not exist three years ago.
Under the old model, it took an average of 5.5 years for a
successful new product to start generating $50 million in revenue.
Brad explained to me, “We’ve generated $50 million in oLerings
that did not exist twelve months ago in the last year. Now it’s not
one particular oLering. It’s a combination of a whole bunch of
innovation happening, but that’s the kind of stuL that’s creating
some energy for us, that we think we can truly short-circuit the
ramp by killing things that don’t make sense fast and doubling
down on the ones that do.” For a company as large as Intuit, these
are modest results and early days. They have decades of legacy
systems and legacy thinking to overcome. However, their leadership
in adopting entrepreneurial management is starting to pay off.
Leadership requires creating conditions that enable employees to
do the kinds of experimentation that entrepreneurship requires. For
example, changes in TurboTax enabled the Intuit team to develop
1ve hundred experiments per tax season. Before that, marketers
with great ideas couldn’t have done those tests even if they’d
wanted to, because they didn’t have a system in place through
which to change the website rapidly. Intuit invested in systems that
increased the speed at which tests could be built, deployed, and
analyzed.
As Cook says, “Developing these experimentation systems is 
the
responsibility of senior management; they have to be put in by the
leadership. It’s moving leaders from playing Caesar with their
thumbs up and down on every idea to—instead—putting in the
culture and the systems so that teams can move and innovate at the
speed of the experimentation system.”
A
3
LEARN
s an entrepreneur, nothing plagued
 me more than the question
of whether my company was making progress toward creating a
successful business. As an engineer and later as a manager, I was
accustomed to measuring progress by making sure our work
proceeded according to plan, was high quality, and cost about what
we had projected.
After many years as an entrepreneur, I started to worry about
measuring progress in this way. What if we found ourselves
building something that nobody wanted? In that case what did it
matter if we did it on time and on budget? When I went home at
the end of a day’s work, the only things I knew for sure were that I
had kept people busy and spent money that day. I hoped that my
team’s e&orts took us closer to our goal. If we wound up taking a
wrong turn, I’d have to take comfort in the fact that at least we’d
learned something important.
Unfortunately, “learning” is the oldest excuse in the book for a
failure of execution. It’s what managers fall back on when they fail
to achieve the results we promised. Entrepreneurs, under pressure
to succeed, are wildly creative when it comes to demonstrating
what we have learned. We can all tell a good story when our job,
career, or reputation depends on it.
However, learning is cold comfort to employees who are
following an entrepreneur into the unknown. It is cold comfort to
the investors who allocate precious money, time, and energy to
entrepreneurial teams. It is cold comfort to the organizations—large
entrepreneurial teams. It is cold comfort to the organizations—large
and small—that depend on entrepreneurial innovation to survive.
You can’t take learning to the bank; you can’t spend it or invest it.
You cannot give it to customers and cannot return it to limited
partners. Is it any wonder that learning has a bad name in
entrepreneurial and managerial circles?
Yet if the fundamental goal of entrepreneurship is to engage in
organization building under conditions of extreme uncertainty, its
most vital function is learning. We must learn the truth about which
elements of our strategy are working to realize our vision and
which are just crazy. We must learn what customers really want, not
what they say they want or what we think they should want. We
must discover whether we are on a path that will lead to growing a
sustainable business.
In the Lean Startup model, we are rehabilitating learning with a
concept I call 
validated learning
. Validated learning is not after-the-
fact rationalization or a good story designed to hide failure. It is a
rigorous method for demonstrating progress when one is embedded
in the soil of extreme uncertainty in which startups grow. Validated
learning is the process of demonstrating empirically that a team has
discovered valuable truths about a startup’s present and future
business prospects. It is more concrete, more accurate, and faster
than market forecasting or classical business planning. It is the
principal antidote to the lethal problem of achieving failure:
successfully executing a plan that leads nowhere.
VALIDATED LEARNING AT IMVU
Let me illustrate this with an example from my career. Many
audiences have heard me recount the story of IMVU’s founding 
and
the many mistakes we made in developing our 8rst product. I’ll
now elaborate on one of those mistakes to illustrate validated
learning clearly.
Those of us involved in the founding of IMVU aspired to be
serious strategic thinkers. Each of us had participated in previous
ventures that had failed, and we were loath to repeat that
ventures that had failed, and we were loath to repeat that
experience. Our main concerns in the early days dealt with the
following questions: What should we build and for whom? What
market could we enter and dominate? How could we build durable
value that would not be subject to erosion by competition?
1
Brilliant Strategy
We decided to enter the instant messaging (IM) market. In 2004,
that market had hundreds of millions of consumers actively
participating worldwide. However, the majority of the customers
who were using IM products were not paying for the privilege.
Instead, large media and portal companies such as AOL, Microsoft,
and Yahoo! operated their IM networks as a loss leader for other
services while making modest amounts of money through
advertising.
IM is an example of a market that involves strong 
network
effects
. Like most communication networks, IM is thought to follow
Metcalfe’s law: the value of a network as a whole is proportional to
the square of the number of participants. In other words, the more
people in the network, the more valuable the network. This makes
intuitive sense: the value to each participant is driven primarily by
how many other people he or she can communicate with. Imagine
a world in which you own the only telephone; it would have no
value. Only when other people also have a telephone does it
become valuable.
In 2004, the IM market was locked up by a handful of
incumbents. The top three networks controlled more than 80
percent of the overall usage and were in the process of
consolidating their gains in market share at the expense of a
number of smaller players.
2
 The common wisdom was that it was
more or less impossible to bring a new IM network to market
without spending an extraordinary amount of money on marketing.
The reason for that wisdom is simple. Because of the power of
network e&ects, IM products have high switching costs. To switch
from one network to another, customers would have to convince
from one network to another, customers would have to convince
their friends and colleagues to switch with them. This extra work
for customers creates a barrier to entry in the IM market: with all
consumers locked in to an incumbent’s product, there are no
customers left with whom to establish a beachhead.
At IMVU we settled on a strategy of building a product that
would combine the large mass appeal of traditional IM with the
high revenue per customer of three-dimensional (3D) video games
and virtual worlds. Because of the near impossibility of bringing a
new IM network to market, we decided to build an IM add-on
product that would interoperate with the existing networks. Thus,
customers would be able to adopt the IMVU virtual goods and
avatar communication technology without having to switch IM
providers, learn a new user interface, and—most important—bring
their friends with them.
In fact, we thought this last point was essential. For the add-on
product to be useful, customers would 
have
 to use it with their
existing friends. Every communication would come embedded with
an invitation to join IMVU. Our product would be inherently viral,
spreading throughout the existing IM networks like an epidemic. To
achieve that viral growth, it was important that our add-on product
support as many of the existing IM networks as possible and work
on all kinds of computers.
Six Months to Launch
With this strategy in place, my cofounders and I began a period of
intense work. As the chief technology oDcer, it was my
responsibility, among other things, to write the software that would
support IM interoperability across networks. My cofounders and I
worked for months, putting in crazy hours struggling to get our 8rst
product released. We gave ourselves a hard deadline of six months
—180 days—to launch the product and attract our 8rst paying
customers. It was a grueling schedule, but we were determined to
launch on time.
The add-on product was so large and complex and had so many
The add-on product was so large and complex and had so many
moving parts that we had to cut a lot of corners to get it done on
time. I won’t mince words: the 8rst version was terrible. We spent
endless hours arguing about which bugs to 8x and which we could
live with, which features to cut and which to try to cram in. It was a
wonderful and terrifying time: we were full of hope about the
possibilities for success and full of fear about the consequences of
shipping a bad product.
Personally, I was worried that the low quality of the product
would tarnish my reputation as an engineer. People would think I
didn’t know how to build a quality product. All of us feared
tarnishing the IMVU brand; after all, we were charging people
money for a product that didn’t work very well. We all envisioned
the damning newspaper headlines: “Inept Entrepreneurs Build
Dreadful Product.”
As launch day approached, our fears escalated. In our situation,
many entrepreneurial teams give in to fear and postpone the launch
date. Although I understand this impulse, I am glad we persevered,
since delay prevents many startups from getting the feedback they
need. Our previous failures made us more afraid of another, even
worse, outcome than shipping a bad 
product: building something
that nobody wants. And so, teeth clenched and apologies at the
ready, we released our product to the public.
Launch
And then—nothing happened! It turned out that our fears were
unfounded, because nobody even tried our product. At 8rst I was
relieved because at least nobody was 8nding out how bad the
product was, but soon that gave way to serious frustration. After all
the hours we had spent arguing about which features to include and
which bugs to 8x, our value proposition was so far o& that
customers weren’t getting far enough into the experience to 8nd out
how bad our design choices were. Customers wouldn’t even
download our product.
Over the ensuing weeks and months, we labored to make the
Over the ensuing weeks and months, we labored to make the
product better. We brought in a steady Gow of customers through
our online registration and download process. We treated each
day’s customers as a brand-new report card to let us know how we
were doing. We eventually learned how to change the product’s
positioning so that customers at least would download it. We were
making improvements to the underlying product continuously,
shipping bug 8xes and new changes daily. However, despite our
best e&orts, we were able to persuade only a pathetically small
number of people to buy the product.
In retrospect, one good decision we made was to set clear
revenue targets for those early days. In the 8rst month we intended
to make $300 in total revenue, and we did—barely. Many friends
and family members were asked (okay, begged). Each month our
small revenue targets increased, 8rst to $350 and then to $400. As
they rose, our struggles increased. We soon ran out of friends and
family; our frustration escalated. We were 
making the product
better every day, yet our customers’ behavior remained unchanged:
they still wouldn’t use it.
Our failure to move the numbers prodded us to accelerate our
e&orts to bring customers into our oDce for in-person interviews
and usability tests. The quantitative targets created the motivation
to engage in qualitative inquiry and guided us in the questions we
asked; this is a pattern we’ll see throughout this book.
I wish I could say that I was the one to realize our mistake and
suggest the solution, but in truth, I was the last to admit the
problem. In short, our entire strategic analysis of the market was
utterly wrong. We 8gured this out empirically, through
experimentation, rather than through focus groups or market
research. Customers could not tell us what they wanted; most, after
all, had never heard of 3D avatars. Instead, they revealed the truth
through their action or inaction as we struggled to make the
product better.
Talking to Customers
